In December 2019, pneumonia infected with the novel coronavirus burst in Wuhan, China. We aimed to use a mathematical model to predict number of diagnosed patients in future to ease anxiety on the emergent situation. In this retrospective, all diagnosis number from Jan 21 to Feb 10, 2020 reported from China was included and downloaded from WHO website. We develop a simple but accurate formula to predict the next day diagnosis number:

In December of 2019, the increasing number of patients with pneumonia of unknown cause emerged in Wuhan, the capital of Hubei province, Central China. Most of the early patients had directly or indirectly related to wild animal source in the seafood and wet animal wholesale market through epidemiological survey [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] . Then laboratory tests found that the infection was caused by a novel coronavirus (now named as NCP 6-7 ).
The spread of NCP is expeditious. According to WHO statistics, the total number of diagnosed people in China was 309 in Jan 21 8 , but rapidly grew to 4537 in Jan 27 9 . Considering a simple constant exponential growth rate model [10] [11] , the diagnosis number will be unimaginable soon. This triggered a major concern and motivated this study [12] [13] [14] . A mathematical model is required to predict the spread trend and emergent situation.
Over the last few decades, mathematical models of disease transmission have been useful to gain insights into the transmission dynamics of infectious diseases and the potential role of intervention strategies 15 . Epidemic transmission models focused on the spread of an infectious disease through a population. But this spread can be modeled in two fundamental ways: by looking at the entire population as a single group or set of linked subgroups (population-based) or by considering everyone that makes up the population and how interactions between unique individuals facilitate disease spread (individual-based). Common models of infectious disease included meta-population models, individual-based network models, and simple SIR-type models that incorporate the effects of reactive behavior changes or inhomogeneous mixing 16 .
Considering the limited number of data points and the complexity of the real situation, a simple but robust model is expected to work better than sophisticated epidemiology models. In this paper, we propose a robust model for next day diagnosis number predict. This model had excellent performance on prediction of infected patients in past few days. The prediction is expected to provide practical significance . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.19.20025262 doi: medRxiv preprint on social and economic application.
, -and its median aggregates were calculated (Fig.1) . It was observed that ,manifests a random fluctuation around a constant center. It is reasonable to assume that is a constant. The estimation of currently (Feb 10) is 0.904. A future diagnosis number formula is obtained based on this estimation: 
Previous numbers of diagnoses in China are used to predict the number for the next day. The prediction is started from Jan 29 as several data points are needed to build the model (Table 1) . We obtain nice concordance (<2.5% error) with the real numbers next day. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint 
We predict the new diagnosis number in China according to our model as Fig.2 . The model predicts that new diagnosis will last to March.
Our model indicates that the NCP disease infection rate decreases exponentially. This model converges to a maximum number as time increases, indicating a limited impact of NCP. The model also predict that the new diagnosis number will last to March, indicating that the NCP disease will be well controlled.
We only analyzed the total number of diagnoses in China. The province scale data is available but is not as complete as total number. Here, we did not show these details analyses.
Our model is attractive as it not only predicts data accurately but also is minimal. The minimal number of parameters and robust statistics make our model robust in the real-world scenario. We develop a formula to predict the next day diagnosis number:
) ) ，and estimate that is 0.904( <1) which shows that the diagnosis number of NCP patients will decrease. It is very effective in controlling the spread of infectious diseases that the Chinese health authorities have taken appropriate health care actions. If the outbreak is no longer controlled, the value of will be around 1 indicating that the outbreak will wreak havoc.
We obtain this elegant formula with both curve plot visualization and mathematical intuition. We plot ln (Ni/Ni-1) against time (Fig.3 ). First few observations showed a linear decay of spread rate. However, later data points realized us at Feb 4 that it is an exponential decay. Later data points further confirm our model. 
Daily diagnosis number of China is download from WHO situation reports (https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/situation-reports). The data starts from Jan 21 and currently it ends at Feb 10.
The following model is proposed based on our observations: . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
(which was not peer-reviewed) The copyright holder for this preprint .
